Translation connector (#409)
akeneo/pim-api-docs: content/guides/translation-connection/step3-interact-with-julia.md

:::warning
Don't forget to set the [permissions](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/manage-your-connections.html#set-the-permissions) of this connection!
:::

As you may understood, your connector need to have a dedicated UI or a configuration file in order to manage these PIM API credentials.

### Check Julia's PIM data

Then, in order for your connector to be able to add translations, Julia's PIM must be correctly set up for that.

:::warning
That's why you must check with Julia that in her PIM:
* All locales required for translations have been activated.
* All attributes requiring translation for products or product models are set to "localizable".
:::

### Create a translation attribute group

First, in order to not mix these new product attributes with other Julia's product attributes, it is necessary that she creates **a specific attribute group** named `Translations`.

To create this attribute group:
1. Go to `Settings > Attribute groups`
2. Click on `CREATE` at top right
3. Add a new attribute group with the code and label: `Translations`.

### Create translation attributes

Then Julia must create 6 new attributes in this attribute group:

> 
> * `Translation submission name`
> * `Translation submitter`
> * `Translation queued`
> * `Translation locales`
> * `Translation due date`
> * `Translation status`
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

* `Translation submission name`
* `Translation submitter`
* `Translation queued`
* `Translation locales`
* `Translation due date`
* `Translation status`

```
We don't need this list anymore, as we have the other one below.

# How to build your connector?

## A connection compliant method

> Now that you have a good overview of Akeneo PIM data, you are probably wondering how to interact with Julia while being compatible with all of our PIM editions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you have a good overview of Akeneo PIM data, you are probably wondering how your online translation connector will interact with Julia while being compatible with all of our PIM editions.
```

Author: Fixed

> The best way to do this is to develop a "[connection](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/what-is-a-connection.html) compliant" connector based on our API.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The best way to do this is to develop a "[connection-compliant](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/what-is-a-connection.html)" connector based on our API.
```

Author: Fixed

![Translation connector overview](../../img/guides/translation-connection-macro.svg)

:::tips
Please don't hesitate to read our ["4 reasons why you should use our API"](https://api.akeneo.com/documentation/why-the-api.html#4-reasons-why-you-should-use-our-api) page!
:::

> We suggest to follow our method which use some useful existing PIM features to interact with Julia.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We suggest following our method which leans on some useful existing PIM features to interact with Julia.
```

Author: Fixed

> This method is based on one of our Marketplace connector specifications: [GlobalLink Connect for Akeneo](https://marketplace.akeneo.com/extension/globallink-connect-akeneo) from [Translations.com](https://www.translations.com) company.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This method is based on one of our Marketplace connector specifications: [GlobalLink Connect for Akeneo](https://marketplace.akeneo.com/extension/globallink-connect-akeneo) from the [Translations.com](https://www.translations.com) company.
```

Author: Fixed

## Some pre-requisites

First of all, we're going to ask Julia to do some work!  
Indeed, in order for your connector to interact with Julia, we will have to ask her to **check some pre-requisites** and to **add some additional data** in her PIM.

### Create a dedicated connection

First, in order to communicate with your connector and obtain API credentials, Julia needs to create a dedicated [connection](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/manage-your-connections.html) for your connector.

> To do so:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do so she will need to:
```

Author: Fixed

1. Go to the `System` menu and then, on the `Connections` submenu

> 2. Click on the `Create` button

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click on `Create`
```

Author: Fixed

3. In the `Label` field, enter the name of your connector.
4. Choose the `Other` flow type

Whenever you create a connection, the PIM automatically generates a set of credentials for you.

> These API credentials consist of 4 different information:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These API credentials consist of 4 items:
```

Author: Fixed

* the `client id`,
* the `secret`,
* the connection `username`,
* the connection `password`.

:::warning
Don't forget to set the [permissions](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/manage-your-connections.html#set-the-permissions) of this connection!
:::

> As you may understood, your connector need to have a dedicated UI or a configuration file in order to manage these PIM API credentials.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you may understand, your connector needs to have a dedicated UI or a configuration file in order to manage these PIM API credentials.
```

Author: Fixed

### Check Julia's PIM data

> Then, in order for your connector to be able to add translations, Julia's PIM must be correctly set up for that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, in order for your connector to be able to add translations, Julia's PIM must be correctly set up.
```

Author: Fixed

:::warning
That's why you must check with Julia that in her PIM:
* All locales required for translations have been activated.
* All attributes requiring translation for products or product models are set to "localizable".
:::

### Create a translation attribute group

> First, in order to not mix these new product attributes with other Julia's product attributes, it is necessary that she creates **a specific attribute group** named `Translations`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, in order not to confuse these new product attributes with some of her other product attributes, it is necessary for Julia to create **a specific attribute group** named `Translations`.
```

Author: Fixed

To create this attribute group:
1. Go to `Settings > Attribute groups`

> 2. Click on `CREATE` at top right

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Click on `CREATE` in the top-right corner
```

Author: Fixed

3. Add a new attribute group with the code and label: `Translations`.

> 

Reviewer 2: MILESTONE

> # Interact with Julia

Reviewer: I don't like this title as it feels a bit blurry. By reading this title, the user won't know what's inside this part. As you describe here the whole "How to" regarding the connector building, I would call it this way "How to build your connector?"

Author: Good idea.

## A connection compliant method

Now that you have a good overview of Akeneo PIM data, you are probably wondering how to interact with Julia while being compatible with all of our PIM editions.

The best way to do this is to develop a "[connection](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/what-is-a-connection.html) compliant" connector based on our API.

![Translation connector overview](../../img/guides/translation-connection-macro.svg)

:::tips
Please don't hesitate to read our ["4 reasons why you should use our API"](https://api.akeneo.com/documentation/why-the-api.html#4-reasons-why-you-should-use-our-api) page!
:::

We suggest to follow our method which use some useful existing PIM features to interact with Julia.

This method is based on one of our Marketplace connector specifications: [GlobalLink Connect for Akeneo](https://marketplace.akeneo.com/extension/globallink-connect-akeneo) from [Translations.com](https://www.translations.com) company.

## Some pre-requisites

> First of all, we're going to ask Julia to do some work!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, we're going to ask Julia to do some work!  
```
Double spaces at the end of the line to force to go to the next line.

To do so:
1. Go to the `System` menu and then, on the `Connections` submenu
2. Click on the `Create` button
3. In the `Label` field, enter the name of your connector.
4. Choose the `Other` flow type

Whenever you create a connection, the PIM automatically generates a set of credentials for you.

These API credentials consist of 4 different information:
* the `client id`,
* the `secret`,
* the connection `username`,
* the connection `password`.

:::warning
Don't forget to set the [permissions](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/manage-your-connections.html#set-the-permissions) of this connection!
:::

As you may understood, your connector need to have a dedicated UI or a configuration file in order to manage these PIM API credentials.

### Check Julia's PIM data

Then, in order for your connector to be able to add translations, Julia's PIM must be correctly set up for that.

:::warning
That's why you must check with Julia that in her PIM:
* All locales required for translations have been activated.
* All attributes requiring translation for products or product models are set to "localizable".
:::

### Create a Translation attribute group

> First, in order to not mix these new product attributes with other Julia's product attributes, it is necessary that she creates **a specific attribute group** named `"Translations"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, in order to not mix these new product attributes with other Julia's product attributes, it is necessary that she creates **a specific attribute group** named `Translations`.
```

To create this attribute group:
1. Go to `Settings > Attribute groups`
2. Click on `CREATE` at top right

> 3. Add a new attribute group with the code: `Translations`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add a new attribute group with the label: `Translations`.
```

> ### Create Translation attributes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create the "Translation" attributes
```

Then Julia must create 6 new attributes in this attribute group:

> * `Translation submission name`
> * `Translation submitter`
> * `Translation queued`
> * `Translation locales`
> * `Translation due date`
> * `Translation status`
> 
> :::tips
> To create an attribute:
> 1. Go to `Settings > Attributes`
> 2. Click on `CREATE ATTRIBUTE` at top right
> 3. Choose the correct attribute type
> 4. Then set the below information
> :::
> 
> 
> `Translation submission name`  
> **Attribute type:** Text  
> **Attribute code:** translationName  
> **Attribute group:** Translations  
> **Usable in grid:** Enabled  
> 
> This attribute allows Julia to set a name to her translation project.  
> It also allows her to easily find this project with this name in the interface of your online Translation solution.
> 
> `Translation submitter`  
> **Attribute type:** Simple select  
> **Attribute code:** translationSubmitter  
> **Attribute group:** Translations  
> **Usable in grid:** Enabled  
> 
> This simple select attribute should contains in its `options` all possible contributor names. This attribute allows Julia to associate her name to her translation project.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Translation submission name`: This attribute allows Julia to set a name to her translation project. It also allows her to easily find this project with this name in the interface of your online translation solution. Set up this attribute as followed:
  - Attribute type: text 
  - Attribute code: `translationName`
  - Attribute label: `Translation submission name`
  - Attribute group: `Translations`
  - Usable in grid: enabled
* `Translation submitter`: This simple select attribute should contain in its options, all possible contributor names. This attribute allows Julia to associate her name to her translation project. Set up this attribute as followed:
  - Attribute type: simple select  
  - Attribute code: `translationSubmitter`
  - Attribute label: `Translation submitter`
  - Attribute group: `Translations` 
  - Usable in grid: enabled 
* `Translation queued`: This attribute allows Julia to set if a product need to be translated. Set up this attribute as followed:
  - Attribute type: Yes/No (Boolean)
  - Attribute code: `translationQueued`
  - Attribute label: `Translation queued`
  - Attribute group: `Translations`
  - Usable in grid: enabled
* `Translation locales`: This multi select attribute should contains in its `options` all destination locales Julia can use to make her translation requests. These same `locales` must of course also already exist in Akeneo PIM and in your online Translation tool. This attribute allows Julia to choose one or more target locales for her translation project. Set up this attribute as followed:
  - Attribute type: multi select
  - Attribute code: `translationLocales`
  - Attribute label: `Translation locales`
  - Attribute group: `Translations`
  - Usable in grid: enabled
* `Translation due date`: This attribute allows Julia to indicate to translators when she would like her products to be translated. Set up this attribute as followed:
  - Attribute type: date 
  - Attribute code: `translationDate`
  - Attribute label: `Translation due date`
  - Attribute group: `Translations` 
  - Usable in grid: enabled  
* `Translation status`: As this last attribute has a `Read only` property, it can't be modified by Julia. Only your connector can modify this status through API and set the translation project status for each desired locale. This attribute contains these options:    
  |      Code      |     Label      |
  | :------------- | :------------- |
  | INPROGRESS     | In progress    |
  | TRANSLATED     | Translated     |
  | CANCELLED      | Cancelled      |
  Then, set up this attribute as followed:
  - Attribute type: simple select  
  - Attribute code: `translationStatus` 
  - Attribute label: `Translation status`
  - Attribute group: `Translations`  
  - Value per locale: enabled (in order to have a status for each locale)    
  - Read only: enabled (can only be modified via API)   
  - Usable in grid: enabled 

::: tips
To create an attribute:
1. Go to `Settings > Attributes`
2. Click on `CREATE ATTRIBUTE` at the top right corner of the screen
:::
I re-organized this entire section as I didn't understand it at first sight.

```

Author: Good idea.

> `Translation queued`  
> **Attribute type:** Yes/No (Boolean)  
> **Attribute code:** translationQueued  
> **Attribute group:** Translations  
> **Usable in grid:** Enabled  
> 
> This attribute allows Julia to set if a product need to be translated.
> 
> `Translation locales`  
> **Attribute type:** Multi select  
> **Attribute code:** translationLocales  
> **Attribute group:** translationLocales  
> **Usable in grid:** Enabled  
> 
> This "Multi select" attribute should contains in its `options` all destination locales Julia can use to make her translation requests.  These same `locales` must of course also already exist in Akeneo PIM and in your online Translation tool.  
> This attribute allows Julia to choose one or more target locales for her translation project.
> 
> `Translation due date`  
> **Attribute type:** Date  
> **Attribute code:** translationDate  
> **Attribute group:** Translations  
> **Usable in grid:** Enabled  
> 
> This attribute allows Julia to indicate to translators when she would like her products to be translated.
> 
> `Translation status`  
> **Attribute type:** Simple select  
> **Attribute code:** translationStatus  
> **Attribute group:** Translations  
> **Value per locale:** Enabled (in order to have a status for each locale)    
> **Read only:** Enabled (Can only be modified via API)   
> **Usable in grid:** Enabled    
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
To delete

Author: I prefer your previous Idea: deleted this one.

> This attribute contains these options:    
> |      Code      |     Label      |
> | :------------- | :------------- |
> | INPROGRESS     | IN PROGRESS    |
> | TRANSLATED     | TRANSLATED     |
> | CANCELLED      | CANCELLED      |
> 
> As this last attribute has a `Read only` property, it can't be modified by Julia. Only your connector can modify this status through API and set the translation project status for each desired locale.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
To delete if you choose to use my previous suggestion.

Author: Deleted this one

:::info
This list of attributes is not exhaustive and may need to be adapted depending on your online Translation solution and the information required to perform a translation project.
:::

> Once the translation attribute group and attributes have been created, Julia needs to assign the `Translations` attribute group to all existing `families`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the `Translation` attribute group and its attributes have been created, Julia needs to assign the `Translations` attribute group to all existing families.
```

:::tips
Julia can do this by using this [bulk action](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/product-mass-actions.html) process:
1. Go to `Settings > Families`
2. Select all families

> 3. Click on `BULK ACTIONS button` at bottom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click on the `BULK ACTIONS` button at the bottom of the page
```

4. Select `Set attributes requirements` and then click on `NEXT`

> 5. Click on `ADD BY GROUPS` drop down option and `ADD` `Translations` attribute group

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Click on the `ADD BY GROUPS` dropdown option and `ADD` the `Translations` attribute group
```

6. Click on `CONFIRM`
:::

> >And that's it! Congratulations, everything is now ready to receive Julia's PIM products she wants to translate!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's it! Congratulations! 🎉  
Everything is now ready to receive Julia's PIM products she wants to translate!
```

## Julia's translation process

As you have understood, Julia will use the previous PIM attributes to define which of her products are to be translated and how they will be processed.

Now let's see how Julia will work with these new PIM translation features.

### Select the attributes to be translated

First, Julia needs to select product she wants to translate:

> 1. Go to `Products` menu

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Go to the `Products` menu
```

> 2. Select the "source" `locale`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select the "source" locale
```

3. Select products (and/or product models) you want to translate

:::tips
For this product selection, Julia can help herself by using her PIM grid [filtering](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/products-grid.html#use-filters) system or by creating a [specific view](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/manage-your-views.html).
:::

> ### Perform a "Bulk action"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Perform a "bulk action"
```

> Then, she needs to perform a [Bulk action](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/product-mass-actions.html) on these products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, she needs to perform a [bulk action](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/product-mass-actions.html) on these products.
```

> For this action, Julia have to:

Reviewer: Maybe we can say that she should be on the product grid.

Author: Sure

> 1. Click on `BULK ACTIONS` button at bottom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click on the `BULK ACTIONS` button at the bottom of the page
```

> 2. Select `Edit attribute`s values and click on `NEXT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Select `Edit attributes values` and click on `NEXT`
```

> 3. From `SELECT ATTRIBUTES` drop down, search and select these 5 translation attributes and click on `ADD`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. In the `SELECT ATTRIBUTES` dropdown, search and select the 5 translation attributes we created above and click on `ADD`:
```

>   * Translation submission name
>   * Translation submitter
>   * Translation queued
>   * Translation locales
>   * Translation due date

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Translation submission name
    * Translation submitter
    * Translation queued
    * Translation locales
    * Translation due date
```
You need to indent twice to put a list in another list (here, the numbered list), otherwise the list is not included inside the numbered list and thus, the next numbered item will reset its counter to 1.

4. Now set the translation attributes:

>   * `Translation name`: enter the desired name for the translation project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Translation name`: enter the desired name for the translation project,
```

>   * `Translations submitter`: select your name (Julia's name).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Translations submitter`: select her name,
```
You were already talking about Julia's actions at the beginning of the article.

>   * `Translation queued`: enable the attribute by sliding the toggle button towards `Yes`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Translation queued`: enable the attribute by sliding the toggle button towards `Yes`,
```

>   * `Translation locales`: select the desired target locales for translation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Translation locales`: select the desired target locales for translation,
```

>   * `Translations due date`: Select the date on which you want to receive the translation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `Translations due date`: Select the date on which you want to receive the translation.
```

> 5. Click on `NEXT` and `CONFIRM` the operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Click on `NEXT` and `CONFIRM` to launch the bulk action.
```

> After this last action, the `Bulk action` will run and Julia will be notified in the Akeneo PIM notification bar once it is successfully executed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this last action, the bulk action will run and Julia will be notified in the Akeneo PIM notification bar once it is successfully executed.
```

> With the attributes of the products Julia wants to have translated now ready, your connector is ready to go!

Reviewer: I'm not sure to understand this sentence.

Author: Sure I will change it.

> ### Translation process

Reviewer: I feel this title is not clear enough. And in fact, this part is quite weird here because it is not part of what Julia has to do. I would go for a dedicated part just after (or even maybe before) the "Julia's translation process" part, named like this "Build your connector" or "Your connector's tasks"...

> At regular intervals, your connector will need to retrieve products where `Translation queued` attribute has been set to Enable (set to `true`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At regular intervals, your connector will need to retrieve products where the `Translation queued` attribute has been set to enable (set to `true`).
```

You can do this by using our PIM [API filtering system](https://api.akeneo.com/documentation/filter.html#filter-on-product-values) on product attribute value.

> Then your connector need to set this attribute to `false` and change the `Translation status` attribute to `IN PROGRESS` to indicate to Julia that the translation is being processed by one of your translator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then your connector needs to set this attribute to `false` and change the `Translation status` attribute to `In progress` to indicate to Julia that the translation is being processed by one of your translators.
```

:::tips

> Using the previous [GET LIST OF PRODUCTS](https://api.akeneo.com/api-reference.html#get_products) API request (with the correct filter), your connector will retrieve a JSON structure of each localizable products.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the ["get a list of products"](https://api.akeneo.com/api-reference.html#get_products) API endpoint (with the correct filter), your connector will retrieve a JSON structure of each localizable products.
```

> Then with the help of the `family code` of these products, your connector will be able to make a [GET LIST OF ATTRIBUTES](https://api.akeneo.com/api-reference.html#get_attributes) API request to retrieve the `type` of attributes that compose this product family.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then with the help of the family code of these products, your connector will be able to call the ["get the list of attributes"](https://api.akeneo.com/api-reference.html#get_attributes) API endpoint to retrieve the type of each attributes that compose this product family.
```

By analyzing these types, you will be able to define for your translator which are the textual attributes he needs to translate.
:::

> When the translation is finished, your translator need to set the `Translation status` attribute to `TRANSLATED` and import all translated product data back to the PIM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the translation is finished, your translator needs to set the `Translation status` attribute to `Translated` and import all translated product data back to the PIM.
```

> If for some reasons the translation project has been cancelled, your translator need to set the `Translation status`attribute to `CANCELLED` and import this product data back to the PIM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If for some reason the translation project has been canceled, your translator needs to set the `Translation status` attribute to `Cancelled` and import this product data back into the PIM.
```

:::info
To develop theses connector actions, and to understand our API please follow our [wonderful dedicated API documentation](https://api.akeneo.com)!
:::

> ### Check Translation status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Check the translation status
```

Now let's go back to Julia's side and see how she can check her translation projects status.

As the `Translation status` has been declared as `Usable in grid`, Julia can:

> * [Customise her grid](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/products-grid.html#customise-the-grid) to add the `Translation status`: this will allow her to sort his products according to their translation status.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Customise her grid](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/products-grid.html#customise-the-grid) to add the `Translation status`: this will allow her to sort her products according to their translation status.
```

> * Add the `Translation status` attribute in her [grid filter](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/products-grid.html#use-filters): this will allow her to filter only product with a specific translation status and create a dedicated [view](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/manage-your-views.html#work-with-the-views) for this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Add the `Translation status` attribute in her [grid filters](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/products-grid.html#use-filters): this will allow her to filter only products with a specific translation status and create a dedicated [view](https://help.akeneo.com/pim/serenity/articles/manage-your-views.html#work-with-the-views) for this feature.
```

> Of she can do the same for all the other "Translation" attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Of course, she can do the same for all the other "Translation" attributes.
```

> >As you can see, without any PIM customization and few development on your connector, Julia can build some powerful translation features in her PIM!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, without any PIM customization and with a few developments on your connector, Julia can build some powerful translation features in her PIM!
```
